


Network Working Group                                 H. Alvestrand, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                    Google
Expires: April 16, 2007                                     C. Karp, Ed.
                                       Swedish Museum of Natural History
                                                            Oct 13, 2006


                An IDNA problem in right-to-left scripts
                     draft-alvestrand-idna-bidi-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The use of right-to-left scripts in internationalized domain names
   has presented several challenges.  This memo discusses one problem
   resulting from a constraint on the use of combining characters at the
   end of an RTL domain label, resulting in some words being declared
   invalid as IDN labels, and proposes a means for ameliorating this
   problem.




Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and problem description . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Detailed examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Dhivehi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Yiddish  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Modification to RFC 3454 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Other issues in need of resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Backwards compatibility considerations . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11




































Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


1.  Introduction and problem description

   The IDNA specification "Stringprep", [RFC3454] makes the following
   statement in its section 6 on the bidi algorithm, :

      3) If a string contains any RandALCat character, a RandALCat
      character MUST be the first character of the string, and a
      RandALCat character MUST be the last character of the string.

   (A RandAlCat character is a character with unambiguously right-to-
   left directionality.)

   The reasoning behind this prohibition is to ensure that every
   component of a visually presented domain name has an unambiguously
   preferred direction.  However, this makes certain words in languages
   written with right-to-left scripts invalid as IDN labels, and in at
   least one case means that all the words of an entire language are
   forbidden as IDN labels.

   This will be illustrated below with examples taken from the Dhivehi
   and Yiddish languages, as written with the Thaana and Hebrew scripts,
   respectively.

   The problem may be addressed by more carefully considering the bidi
   algorithm in Unicode Standard Annex #9 [UAX9] which states in section
   3.3.3 W1: "Examine each non-spacing mark (NSM) in the level run, and
   change the type of the NSM to the type of the previous character."
   ("Previous" as used here refers to the sequence of Unicode characters
   in a data stream, and is not related to the positions of the
   characters when displayed.)

   Section 3 of UAX9 contains several instructions for determining the
   directionality of the characters in a string.  Some of them (for
   instance those using explicit embedding) are irrelevant to IDNA
   because the corresponding codes are not permitted as IDNA input, so a
   slightly simplified version should be enough for IDNA purposes.

   A note on terminology:

   In this memo, we use "network order" to describe the sequence of
   characters as transmitted on the wire or stored in a file; the terms
   "first", "next" and "previous" are used to refer to the relationship
   of characters in network order.

   We use "display order" to talk about the sequence of characters as
   imaged on a display medium; the terms "left" and "right" are used to
   refer to the relationship of characters in display order.




Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


2.  Detailed examples

2.1.  Dhivehi

   Dhivehi, the official language of the Maldives, is written with the
   Thaana script.  This displays some of the characteristics of Arabic
   script, including its directional properties, and the indication of
   vowels by the diacritical marking of consonantal base characters.
   This marking is obligatory, and both double vowels and syllable-final
   consonants are indicated by the marking of special unvoiced
   characters.  Every Dhivehi word therefore ends with a combining mark.

   The word for "computer", which is romanized as "konpeetaru", is
   written with the following sequence of Unicode code points:

      U+0786 THAANA LETTER KAAFU (AL)

      U+07AE THAANA OBOFILI (NSM)

      U+0782 THAANA LETTER NOONU (AL)

      U+07B0 THAANA SUKUN (NSM)

      U+0795 THAANA LETTER PAVIYANI (AL)

      U+07A9 THAANA LETTER EEBEEFILI (AL)

      U+0793 THAANA LETTER TAVIYANI (AL)

      U+07A6 THAANA ABAFILI (NSM)

      U+0783 THAANA LETTER RAA (AL)

      U+07AA THANAA UBIUFILI (NSM)

   The directionality class of U+07AA in the Unicode database is NSM
   (non-spacing mark), which is not R or AL; a conformant implementation
   of the IDNA algorithm will say that "this is not in RandALCat", and
   refuse to encode the string.

2.2.  Yiddish

   Yiddish is one of several languages written with the Hebrew script
   (others include Hebrew and Ladino).  This is basically a consonantal
   alphabet but Yiddish is written using an extended form that is fully
   vocalic.  The vowels are indicated in several ways, of which one is
   by repurposing letters that are consonants in Hebrew.  Other letters
   are used both as vowels and consonants, with combining marks used to



Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


   differentiate between them.  Finally, some base characters can
   indicate several different vowels, which are also disambiguated by
   combining marks.  Marked characters can appear in word-final position
   and may therefore also be needed at the end of labels.  This is not
   an invariable attribute of all Yiddish strings and there is thus
   greater latitude here than there is with Dhivehi.

   The "YIVO Institute for Jewish Research" is widely known by the
   acronym of its Yiddish name.  This organization maintains a primary
   reference standard for modern Standard Yiddish orthography, that is
   also commonly referred to by the same acronym (as the "YIVO Rules").
   YIVO is written with the Hebrew letters YOD YOD HIRIQ VAV VAV ALEF
   QAMATS, where HIRIQ and QAMATS are combining "points":

      U+05D9 HEBREW LETTER YOD (R)

      U+05B4 HEBREW POINT HIRIQ (NSM)

      U+05D5 HEBREW LETTER VAV (R)

      U+05D0 HEBREW LETTER ALEF (R)

      U+05B8 HEBREW POINT QAMATS (NSM)

   The directionality class of U+05B8 HEBREW POINT QAMATS in the Unicode
   database is NSM, which again causes the IDNA algorithm to reject the
   string.  (It may also be noted that the requisite combined characters
   also exist in precomposed form at separate positions in the Unicode
   chart.  However, Stringprep also rejects those codepoints, for
   reasons not discussed here.)


3.  Modification to RFC 3454

   If the following modification is made to RFC 3454, we believe that
   the usefulness of the specification for languages written with right-
   to-left scripts will be significantly improved:

   Old text:

      [Unicode3.2] defines several bidirectional categories; each
      character has one bidirectional category assigned to it.  For the
      purposes of the requirements below, an "RandALCat character" is a
      character that has Unicode bidirectional categories "R" or "AL";
      an "LCat character" is a character that has Unicode bidirectional
      category "L".





Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006




   New text:

      [Unicode3.2] defines several bidirectional categories; each
      character has one bidirectional category assigned to it.

      For characters that have category "R", "AL" or "L", the category
      is fixed (UAX#9 defines them as having "strong" category); for
      characters in category EN, ES, ET, AN, CS, NSM, BN, B, S, WS and
      ON, the category is determined by applying the algorithm described
      in UAX#9 section 3.3 to the string.

      For the purposes of the requirements below, an "RandALCat
      character" is a character that, after this determination, has
      Unicode bidirectional categories "R" or "AL"; an "LCat character"
      is a character that has Unicode bidirectional category "L".

   Note that Unicode 5.0 is the current version of Unicode.  This fix
   refers to Unicode 3.2 only, to maintain consistency with the rest of
   RFC 3454; nothing here should affect the relationship between Unicode
   versions and IDNA.

   Also, as noted in the introduction, the Unicode UAX#9 algorithm is
   quite complex.  For the purposes of IDNA, a simpler algorithm may be
   defind that yields the same result within the constraints of this
   context, but may be easier for people to implement consistently.
   Such an algorithm may be included in later versions of this memo.


4.  Other issues in need of resolution

   This is not the only issue with right-to-left scripts.  Retaining
   Yiddish for the purposes of further exemplification, its alphabet
   includes three digraphs that can be encoded both as consecutive
   instances of the two component characters, and as precomposed
   ligatures.  One of these digraphs also requires additional combined
   marking.  For example, the HEBREW LIGATURE YIDDISH DOUBLE VAV
   (U+05F0) is orthographically equivalent to, and typographically
   utterly confusable with, a sequence of two HEBREW LETTER VAV
   (U+05D5).  However, the ligature has no canonical decomposition and
   is therefore preserved by the IDNA algorithm.  These digraphs need to
   be enumerated and the one form either made invalid for input in the
   IDNA context, or normalized to the other.

   We believe that there is a clear likelihood of similar issues
   existing with other scripts and languages that are not currently used
   extensively with IDNs.  Careful consideration of all the languages



Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


   written in a given script, in consultation with all of the
   corresponding speech communities, is therefore needed before we can
   say with any degree of certainty that using that script for IDNs is
   unproblematic.

   Another set of issues concerns the proper display of IDNs with a
   mixture of LTR and RTL labels, or only RTL labels; it is not clear to
   these authors what the proper display order of the components of a
   domain name are if the directiion of the components (in network
   order) is, for instance, FirstRTL.SecondRTL.LTR - is it
   LTRtsriF.LTRdnoceS.LTR or LTRdnoceS.LTRtsrif.LTR?  Again, this memo
   does not attempt to suggest a solution to this problem.


5.  Backwards compatibility considerations

   As with any change to an existing standard, it is important to
   consider what happens with existing implementations when the change
   is introduced.  The following troublesome cases have been noted:

   o  Old program used to input the newly allowed string.  If the old
      program checks the input against RFC 3454, the string will not be
      allowed, and that domain name will remain inaccessible.

   o  Old program is asked to display the newly allowed string, and
      checks it against RFC 3454 before displaying.  The program will
      perform some kind of fallback, most likely displaying the Punycode
      form of the string.

   o  Old program tries to display the newly allowed string.  If the old
      program has code for displaying the last character of a string
      that is different from the code used to display the characters in
      the middle of the string, display may be inconsistent and cause
      confusion.

   One particular example of the last case is if a program chooses to
   examine the last character (in network order) of a string in order to
   determine its directionality, rather than its first; if it finds an
   NSM character and tries to display the string as if it was a left-to-
   right string, the resulting display may be interesting, but not
   useful.

   The authors believe that these cases will have less harmful impact in
   practice than continuing to deny the use of words from the languages
   for which these strings are necessary as IDN labels.






Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


7.  Security Considerations

   This modification will allow some strings to be used in Stringprep
   contexts that are not allowed today.  It is possible that differences
   in the interpretation of the specification between old and new
   implementations could pose a security risk, but it is difficult to
   envision any specific instantiation of this.

   Any rational attempt to compute, for instance, a hash over an
   identifier processed by stringprep would use network order for its
   computation, and thus be unaffected by the changes proposed here.

   While it is not believed to pose a problem, if display routines had
   been written with specific knowledge of the current Stringprep
   prohibitions, it is possible that the possible problems noted under
   "backwards compatibility" could cause new kinds of confusion.


8.  Acknowledgements

   While the listed editors held the pen, this document represents the
   joint work and conclusions of an ad hoc design team.  In addition to
   the editors this consisted of, in alphabetic order, Tina Dam, Patrik
   Faltstrom, and John Klensin.  Many further specific contributions and
   helpful comments were received from the people listed below, and
   others who have contributed to the development and use of the IDNA
   protocols.

   The team wishes in particular to thank Roozbeh Pournader for calling
   its attention to the issue with the Thaana script, and Paul Hoffmann
   for pointing out the need to be explicit about backwards
   compatibility considerations.

9.  References

   [RFC3454]  Hoffman, P. and M. Blanchet, "Preparation of
              Internationalized Strings ("stringprep")", RFC 3454,
              December 2002.

   [UAX9]     0, "Unicode Standard Annex #9: The Bidirectional



Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


              Algorithm, revision 15", 03 2005.


















































Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Harald Tveit Alvestrand (editor)
   Google
   Beddingen 10
   Trondheim,   7014
   Norway


   Cary Karp (editor)
   Swedish Museum of Natural History
   Frescativ. 40
   Stockholm,   10405
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 8 5195 4055
   Fax:
   Email: ck@nrm.museum
   URI:
































Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                IDNA RTL fix                      Oct 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Alvestrand & Karp        Expires April 16, 2007                [Page 11]

